Geometry


           9
           Hilbert’s third problem:
           decomposing polyhedra 53
           10
           Lines in the plane
           and decompositions of graphs 63
           11
           The slope problem 69
           12
           Three applications
           of Euler’s formula 75
           13
           Cauchy’s rigidity theorem 81
           14
           Touching simplices 85
           15
           Every large point set
           has an obtuse angle 89
           16
           Borsuk’s conjecture 95




           “Platonic solids — child’s play!”
Hilbert’s third problem:                                                                       Chapter 9
decomposing polyhedra



In his legendary address to the International Congress of Mathematicians
at Paris in 1900 David Hilbert asked — as the third of his twenty-three
problems — to specify

    “two tetrahedra of equal bases and equal altitudes which can in
    no way be split into congruent tetrahedra, and which cannot be
    combined with congruent tetrahedra to form two polyhedra which
    themselves could be split up into congruent tetrahedra.”


This problem can be traced back to two letters of Carl Friedrich Gauss
from 1844 (published in Gauss’ collected works in 1900). If tetrahedra
of equal volume could be split into congruent pieces, then this would give
one an “elementary” proof of Euclid’s theorem XII.5 that pyramids with
the same base and height have the same volume. It would thus provide
an elementary definition of the volume for polyhedra (that would not de-
pend on continuity arguments). A similar statement is true in plane geome-   David Hilbert
try: the Bolyai–Gerwien Theorem [1, Sect. 2.7] states that planar polygons
are both equidecomposable (can be dissected into congruent triangles) and
equicomplementable (can be made equidecomposable by adding congruent
triangles) if and only if they have the same area.




                                                                             The cross is equicomplementable with a
                                                                             square of the same area: By adding the
                                                                             same four triangles we can make them
                                                                             equidecomposable (indeed: congruent).




                                                                             In fact, the cross and the square are even
                                                                             equidecomposable.

M. Aigner, G.M. Ziegler, Proofs from THE BOOK,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-00856-6_9, © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
54                                                                       Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra

                                              Hilbert — as we can see from his wording of the problem — did expect that
                                              there is no analogous theorem for dimension three, and he was right. In fact,
                                              the problem was completely solved by Hilbert’s student Max Dehn in two
                                              papers: The first one, exhibiting non-equidecomposable tetrahedra of equal
                                              base and height, appeared already in 1900, the second one, also covering
                                              equicomplementability, appeared in 1902. However, Dehn’s papers are not
                                              easy to understand, and it takes effort to see whether Dehn did not fall into a
                                              subtle trap which ensnared others: a very elegant but unfortunately wrong
                                              proof was found by Raoul Bricard (in 1896!), by Herbert Meschkowski
                                              (1960), and probably by others. However, Dehn’s proof was reworked by
                                              others, clarified and redone, and after combined efforts of several authors
                                              one arrived at the “classical proof”, as presented in Boltianskii’s book on
                                              Hilbert’s third problem and also in earlier editions of this one.
                                              In the following, however, we take advantage of a decisive simplification
                                              that was found by V. F. Kagan from Odessa already in 1903: His integral-
                                              ity argument, which we here present as the “cone lemma”, yields a “pearl
                                              lemma” (given here in a recent version, due to Benko), and from this we
                                              derive a correct and complete proof for “Bricard’s condition” (as claimed
                                              in Bricard’s 1896 paper). Once we apply this to some examples we easily
                                              obtain the solution of Hilbert’s third problem.
                                              The appendix to this chapter provides some basics about polyhedra.
                                              As above we call two polyhedra P and Q equidecomposable if they can
  A                                           be decomposed into finite sets of polyhedra P1 , . . . , Pn and Q1 , . . . , Qn
                 D                            such that Pi and Qi are congruent for all i. Two polyhedra are equicomple-
                                              mentable if there are equidecomposable polyhedra P' = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn and
                                              Q' = Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qn that also have decompositions involving P and Q of
                C                             the form P' = P ∪ P1 ∪ P2 ∪ · · · ∪ Pm and Q  ' = Q ∪ Q1 ∪ Q2 ∪ · · · ∪ Qm ,
     B                                        where Pk is congruent to Qk for all k. (See the large figure to the right
                                              for an illustration.) A theorem of Gerling from 1844 [1, §12] implies that
                                              for these definitions it does not matter whether we admit reflections when
                                              considering congruences, or not.
                                              For polygons in the plane, equidecomposability and equicomplementability
                                              are defined analogously.
                                              Clearly, equidecomposable objects are equicomplementable (this is the case
                    C                         m = 0), but the converse is far from clear. We will use “Bricard’s condi-
                                              tion” as our tool to certify — as Hilbert proposed — that certain tetrahedra
                                              of equal volume are not equicomplementable, and in particular not equi-
         B                   D                decomposable.
                     A                        Before we really start to work with three-dimensional polyhedra, let us
                                              derive the pearl lemma, which is equally interesting also for planar decom-
This equidecomposition of a square and        positions. It refers to the segments in a decomposition: In any decompo-
an equilateral triangle into four pieces is   sition the edges of one piece may be subdivided by vertices or edges of
due to Henry Dudeney (1902).                  other pieces; the pieces of this subdivision we call segments. Thus in the
The short segment in the middle of the        two-dimensional case any endpoint of a segment is given by some vertex.
equilateral triangle is the intersection of   In the three-dimensional case the end of a segment may also be given by
pieces A and C, but it is not an edge of      a crossing of two edges. However, in any case all the interior points of a
any one of the pieces.                        segment belong to the same set of edges of pieces.
Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra                                                                        55


   P' = P ∪ P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pm              ' = Q ∪ Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qm
                                         Q

     P1                                                            Q1

            P                                          Q

                   P2                            Q2


   P' = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn                 ' = Q ∪ ···∪ Q
                                        Q    1         n



       P1         P2                                  Q2         Q4


                                                                                For a parallelogram P and a non-convex
       P3         P4                             Q1   Q3
                                                                                hexagon Q that are equicomplementary,
                                                                                this figure illustrates the four decompo-
                                                                                sitions we refer to.

The Pearl Lemma. If P and Q are equidecomposable, then one can place
a positive numbers of pearls (that is, assign positive integers) to all the
segments of the decompositions P = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn and Q = Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qn
in such a way that each edge of a piece Pk receives the same number of
pearls as the corresponding edge of Qk .

 Proof. Assign a variable xi to each segment in the decomposition of P
and a variable yj to each segment in the decomposition of Q. Now we have
to find positive integer values for the variables xi and yj in such a way
that the xi -variables corresponding to the segments of any edge of some
Pk yield the same sum as the yj -variables assigned to the segments of the
corresponding edge of Qk . This yields conditions that require that “some                     P3
xi -variables have the same sum as some yj -values”, namely
                                     
                             xi −           yj = 0                                            P2
                        i:si ⊆e      j:sj ⊆e
                                                                                       P1
where the edge e ⊂ Pk decomposes into the segments si , while the corre-
sponding edge e ⊂ Qk decomposes into the segments sj . This is a linear                P4
equation with integer coefficients.
We note, however, that positive real values satisfying all these requirements
exist, namely the (real) lengths of the segments! Thus we are done, in view
of the following lemma.                                                                      Q3 Q1

The polygons P and Q considered in the figure above are, indeed, equide-                     Q2      Q4
composable. The figure to the right illustrates this, and shows a possible
placement of pearls.
56                                                                          Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra

                                               The Cone Lemma. If a system of homogeneous linear equations with in-
                                               teger coefficients has a positive real solution, then it also has a positive
                                               integer solution.

                                                Proof. The name of this lemma stems from the interpretation that the set

                                                                     C = {x ∈ RN : Ax = 0, x > 0}

                                               given by an integer matrix A ∈ ZM×N describes a (relatively open) rational
                                               cone. We have to show that if this is nonempty, then it also contains integer
                                               points: C ∩ NN = ∅.
                                               If C is nonempty, then so is C̄ := {x ∈ RN : Ax = 0, x ≥ 1}, since for
                                               any positive vector a suitable multiple will have all coordinates equal to or
                                               larger than 1. (Here 1 denotes the vector with all coordinates equal to 1.)
                                               It suffices to verify that C̄ ⊆ C contains a point with rational coordinates,
                                               since then multiplication with a common denominator for all coordinates
                                               will yield an integer point in C̄ ⊆ C.
                                               There are many ways to prove this. We follow a well-trodden path that was
                                               first explored by Fourier and Motzkin [8, Lecture 1]: By “Fourier–Motzkin
                                               elimination” we show that the lexicographically smallest solution to the
                                               system
                                                                                Ax = 0, x ≥ 1

                                               exists, and that it is rational if the matrix A is integral.
                                               Indeed, any linear equation aT x = 0 can be equivalently enforced by two
                                               inequalities aT x ≥ 0, −aT x ≥ 0. (Here a denotes a column vector and
                                               aT its transpose.) Thus it suffices to prove that any system of the type
      x1 = 1
                                                                                Ax ≥ b, x ≥ 1
 x2
                                               with integral A and b has a lexicographically smallest solution, which is
                                               rational, provided that the system has any real solution at all.
                                               For this we argue with induction on N . The case N = 1 is clear. For N > 1
                                               look at all the inequalities that involve xN . If x = (x1 , . . . , xN −1 ) is fixed,
               2x1 − 3x2 = 0
                                               these inequalities give lower bounds on xN (among them xN ≥ 1) and
                                               possibly also upper bounds. So we form a new system A x ≥ b, x ≥ 1
                                               in N − 1 variables, which contains all the inequalities from the system
                                               Ax ≥ b that do not involve xN , as well as all the inequalities obtained
                               x2 = 1          by requiring that all upper bounds on xN (if there are any) are larger or
                                        x1     equal to all the lower bounds on xN (which include xN ≥ 1). This system
                                               in N − 1 variables has a solution, and thus by induction it has a lexico-
Example:     Here C̄ is given by               graphically minimal solution x∗ , which is rational. And then the smallest
2x1 − 3x2 = 0, xi ≥ 1. Eliminating x2          xN compatible with this solution x∗ is easily found, it is determined by a
yields x1 ≥ 32 . The lexicographically         linear equation or inequality with integer coefficients, and thus it is rational
minimal solution to the system is ( 32 , 1).   as well.                                                                           
Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra                                                                                57

Now we focus on decompositions of three-dimensional polyhedra. The
dihedral angles, that is, the angles between adjacent facets, play a decisive
role in the following theorem.

Theorem. (“Bricard’s condition”)
If three-dimensional polyhedra P and Q with dihedral angles α1 , . . . , αr
resp. β1 , . . . , βs are equidecomposable, then there are positive integers mi ,   In a cube, all dihedral angles are π2 .
nj and an integer k with

           m1 α1 + . . . + mr αr = n1 β1 + . . . + ns βs + kπ.

The same holds more generally if P and Q are equicomplementable.

 Proof. Let us first assume that P and Q are equidecomposable, with
decompositions P = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn and Q = Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qn , where Pi is
congruent to Qi . We assign a positive number of pearls to every segment            For a prism over an equilateral triangle,
in both decompositions, according to the pearl lemma.                               we get the dihedral angles π3 and π2 .
Let Σ1 be the sum of all the dihedral angles at all the pearls in the pieces
of the decomposition of P . If an edge of a piece Pi contains several pearls,
then the dihedral angle at this edge will appear several times in the sum Σ1 .
If a pearl is contained in several pieces, then several angles are added for
this pearl, but they are all measured in the plane through the pearl that is
orthogonal to the corresponding segment. If the segment is contained in
an edge of P , the addition yields the (interior) dihedral angle αj at the
edge. The addition yields the angle π in the case that the segment lies in
the boundary of P but not on an edge. If the pearl/the segment lies in the
interior of P , then the sum of dihedral angles yields 2π or π. (The latter
case occurs in case the pearl lies in the interior of a face of a piece Pi .)
Thus we get a representation

                   Σ1 = m1 α1 + . . . + mr αr + k1 π

for positive integers mj (1 ≤ j ≤ r) and nonnegative k1 . Similarly for the
sum Σ2 of all the angles at the pearls of the decomposition of Q we get

                    Σ2 = n1 β1 + . . . + ns βs + k2 π

for positive integers nj (1 ≤ j ≤ s) and nonnegative k2 .
However, we can also obtain the sums Σ1 and Σ2 by adding all the contribu-
tions in the individual pieces Pi and Qi . Since Pi and Qi are congruent, we
measure the same dihedral angles at the corresponding edges, and the Pearl
Lemma guarantees that we get the same number of pearls from the decom-
positions of P resp. Q at the corresponding edges. Thus we get Σ1 = Σ2 ,
which yields Bricard’s condition (with k = k2 − k1 ∈ Z) for the case of
equidecomposability.
Now let us assume that P and Q are equicomplementable, that is, that we
have decompositions

    P' = P ∪ P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pm         and       ' = Q ∪ Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qm ,
                                               Q
58                                                 Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra


                         where Pi and Qi are congruent, and such that P' and Q
                                                                             ' are equidecompos-
                         able, as
                                 P' = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn        and      ' = Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qn ,
                                                                      Q
                         where Pi and Qi are congruent (as in the figure on page 55). Again, using
                         the pearl lemma, we place pearls to all the segments in all four decompo-
                         sitions, where we impose the extra condition that each edge of P' gets the
                         same total number of pearls in both decompositions, and similarly for Q. '
                         (The proof of the pearl lemma via the cone lemma allows for such extra
                         restrictions!) We also compute the sums of angles at pearls Σ1 and Σ2 as
                         well as Σ1 and Σ2 .
                         The angle sums Σ1 and Σ2 refer to decompositions of different polyhedra,
                         P' and Q,
                                 ' into the same set of pieces, hence we get Σ = Σ as above.
                                                                              1     2
                         The angle sums Σ1 and Σ1 refer to different decompositions of the same
                         polyhedron, P' . Since we have put the same number of pearls onto the edges
                         in both decompositions, the argument above yields Σ1 = Σ1 + 1 π for an
                         integer 1 ∈ Z. The same way we also get Σ2 = Σ2 + 2 π for an integer
                         2 ∈ Z. Thus we conclude that
                                          Σ2 = Σ1 + π        for  = 2 − 1 ∈ Z.

                         However, Σ1 and Σ2 refer to decompositions of P' resp. Q      ' into the same
                         pieces, except that the first one uses P as a piece, while the second uses Q.
                         Thus subtracting the contributions of Pi resp. Qi from both sides, we obtain
                         the desired conclusion: the contributions of P and Q to the respective angle
                         sums,
                                     m1 α1 + . . . + mr αr and n1 β1 + . . . + ns βs ,
                         where mj counts the pearls on edges with dihedral angle αj in P and nj
                         counts the pearls on edges with dihedral angle βj in Q, differ by an integer
                         multiple of π, namely by π.                                              

                         From Bricard’s condition we now get a complete solution for Hilbert’s third
                         problem: We just have to compute the dihedral angles for some examples.
                         Example 1. For a regular tetrahedron T0 with edge lengths , we calculate
     D                   the dihedral angle from the sketch. The midpoint M of the base triangle
                         divides the height AE of the base triangle by 1:2, and since |AE| = |DE|,
                         we find cos α = 31 , and thus
                                                       α = arccos 13 .
                         Thus we find that a regular tetrahedron cannot be equidecomposable or
                     C   equicomplementable with a cube. Indeed, all the dihedral angles in a cube
             α           equal π2 , so Bricard’s condition requires that
A    M           E
         B                                       m1 arccos 13 = n1 π2 + kπ
                         for positive integers m1 , n1 and an integer k. But this cannot hold, since
                         we know from Theorem 3 of Chapter 7 that π1 arccos 13 is irrational.
Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra                                                                          59

Example 2. Let T1 be a tetrahedron spanned by three orthogonal edges
AB, AC, AD of length u. This tetrahedron has three dihedral angles that
are right angles, and three more dihedral angles of equal size ϕ, which we                        D
calculate from the sketch as
                                          √
                            |AE|        1
                                        2 2u           1                                                      √
                  cos ϕ =          = 1√ √         = √ .                                                        2u
                            |DE|      2 3     2u        3
                                                                                                  u
It follows that                                                                                   A       u
                               ϕ = arccos √13 .                                               u       ϕ             C
                                                                                                          E
                                                                                      B
Thus the only dihedral angles occuring in T1 are π,                            √1
                                                                 2 , and arccos 3 .
                                                                 π

From this Bricard’s condition tells us that this tetrahedron as well is not
equicomplementable with a cube of the same volume, this time using that
                                  1       √1
                                  π arccos 3
                                                                                                                    D
is irrational, as we proved in Chapter 7 (take n = 3 in Theorem 3).


Example 3. Finally, let T2 be a tetrahedron with three consecutive edges                                            u
AB, BC and CD that are mutually orthogonal (an “orthoscheme”) and of
the same length u.
                                                                                              B               u
It is easy to calculate the angles in such a tetrahedron (three of them equal π2 ,
                                                                                                                    C
two of them equal π4 , and one of them is π6 ), if we use that the cube of side           u
length u can be decomposed into six tetrahedra of this type (three congruent
copies, and three mirror images). Thus all dihedral angles in T2 are rational         A
multiples of π, and thus with the same proofs as above (in particular, the
irrationality results that we have quoted from Chapter 7) Bricard’s Condi-
tion implies that T2 is not equidecomposable, and not even equicomple-
mentable, with T0 or T1 .

This solves Hilbert’s third problem, since T1 and T2 have congruent bases
and the same height.




Appendix: Polytopes and polyhedra
A convex polytope in Rd is the convex hull of a finite set S = {s1 , . . . , sn },
that is, a set of the form
                                 .
                                  n                        
                                                           n           /
          P = conv(S) :=                 λi si : λi ≥ 0,         λi = 1 .
                                   i=1                     i=1

Polytopes are certainly familiar objects: Prime examples are given by con-
vex polygons (2-dimensional convex polytopes) and by convex polyhedra
(3-dimensional convex polytopes).
60                                                              Hilbert’s third problem: decomposing polyhedra

                                     There are several types of polyhedra that generalize to higher dimensions
                                     in a natural way. For example, if the set S is affinely independent of
                                     cardinality d + 1, then conv(S) is a d-dimensional simplex (or d-simplex).
                                     For d = 2 this yields a triangle, for d = 3 we obtain a tetrahedron. Simi-
                                     larly, squares and cubes are special cases of d-cubes, such as the unit d-cube
                                     given by
                                                                Cd = [0, 1]d ⊆ Rd .


                                     General polytopes are defined as finite unions of convex polytopes. In this
                                     book non-convex polyhedra will appear in connection with Cauchy’s rigid-
                                     ity theorem in Chapter 13, and non-convex polygons in connection with
                                     Pick’s theorem in Chapter 12, and again when we discuss the art gallery
                                     theorem in Chapter 35.
                                     Convex polytopes can, equivalently, be defined as the bounded solution sets
Familiar polytopes:
                                     of finite systems of linear inequalities. Thus every convex polytope P ⊆ Rd
tetrahedron and cube
                                     has a representation of the form

                                                             P = {x ∈ Rd : Ax ≤ b}

                                     for some matrix A ∈ Rm×d and a vector b ∈ Rm . In other words, P is the
                                     solution set of a system of m linear inequalities

                                                                     aTi x ≤ bi ,

                                     where aTi is the i-th row of A. Conversely, every bounded such solution
                                     set is a convex polytope, and can thus be represented as the convex hull of
                                     a finite set of points.
                                     For polygons and polyhedra, we have the familiar concepts of vertices,
                                     edges, and 2-faces. For higher-dimensional convex polytopes, we can de-
                                     fine their faces as follows: a face of P is a subset F ⊆ P of the form

The permutahedron has 24 vertices,                           P ∩ {x ∈ Rd : aT x = b},
36 edges and 14 facets.
                                     where aT x ≤ b is a linear inequality that is valid for all points x ∈ P .
                                     All the faces of a polytope are themselves polytopes. The set V of vertices
                                     (0-dimensional faces) of a convex polytope is also the inclusion-minimal set
                                     such that conv(V ) = P . Assuming that P ⊆ Rd is a d-dimensional convex
                                     polytope, the facets (the (d−1)-dimensional faces) determine a minimal set
                                     of hyperplanes and thus of halfspaces that contain P , and whose intersec-
                                     tion is P . In particular, this implies the following fact that we will need
                                     later: Let F be a facet of P , denote by HF the hyperplane it determines,
                                     and by HF+ and HF− the two closed half-spaces bounded by HF . Then one
                                     of these two halfspaces contains P (and the other one doesn’t).
                                     The graph G(P ) of the convex polytope P is given by the set V of ver-
                                     tices, and by the edge set E of 1-dimensional faces. If P has dimension 3,
                                     then this graph is planar, and gives rise to the famous “Euler polyhedron
                                     formula” (see Chapter 12).
