How to guard a museum                                                                               Chapter 35




Here is an appealing problem which was raised by Victor Klee in 1973.
Suppose the manager of a museum wants to make sure that at all times
every point of the museum is watched by a guard. The guards are stationed
at fixed posts, but they are able to turn around. How many guards are
needed?
We picture the walls of the museum as a polygon consisting of n sides.
Of course, if the polygon is convex, then one guard is enough. In fact, the
guard may be stationed at any point of the museum. But, in general, the
walls of the museum may have the shape of any closed polygon.                      A convex exhibition hall
Consider a comb-shaped museum with n = 3m walls, as depicted on the
right. It is easy to see that this requires at least m = n3 guards. In fact,
there are n walls. Now notice that the point 1 can only be observed by a
guard stationed in the shaded triangle containing 1, and similarly for the
other points 2, 3, . . . , m. Since all these triangles are disjoint we conclude
that at least m guards are needed. But m guards are also enough, since they
can be placed at the top lines of the triangles. By cutting off one or two                                        ...
walls at the end, we conclude that for any n there is an n-walled museum
which requires n3 guards.                                                            1          2         3         ...   m




                                                                                   A real life art gallery. . .

M. Aigner, G.M. Ziegler, Proofs from THE BOOK,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-00856-6_35, © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
232                                                                                              How to guard a museum

                                           The following result states that this is the worst case.


                                               Theorem. For any museum with n walls,         n
                                                                                             3   guards suffice.


                                           This “art gallery theorem” was first proved by Vašek Chvátal by a clever
                                           argument, but here is a proof due to Steve Fisk that is truly beautiful.
A museum with n = 12 walls                  Proof. First of all, let us draw n − 3 non-crossing diagonals between
                                           corners of the walls until the interior is triangulated. For example, we can
                                           draw 9 diagonals in the museum depicted in the margin to produce a trian-
                                           gulation. It does not matter which triangulation we choose, any one will do.
                                           Now think of the new figure as a plane graph with the corners as vertices
                                           and the walls and diagonals as edges.
                                               Claim. This graph is 3-colorable.

A triangulation of the museum              For n = 3 there is nothing to prove. Now for n > 3 pick any two vertices
                                           u and v which are connected by a diagonal. This diagonal will split the
                                           graph into two smaller triangulated graphs both containing the edge uv. By
                                           induction we may color each part with 3 colors where we may choose color
                                           1 for u and color 2 for v in each coloring. Pasting the colorings together
                                           yields a 3-coloring of the whole graph.
                                           The rest is easy. Since there are n vertices, at least one of the color classes,
                                           say the vertices colored 1, contains at most n3 vertices, and this is where
                                           we place the guards. Since every triangle contains a vertex of color 1 we in-
                                           fer that every triangle is guarded, and hence so is the whole museum.         
           C
                              B            The astute reader may have noticed a subtle point in our reasoning. Does
 A                                         a triangulation always exist? Probably everybody’s first reaction is: Obvi-
                                           ously, yes! Well, it does exist, but this is not completely obvious, and,
                                           in fact, the natural generalization to three dimensions (partitioning into
                                           tetrahedra) is false! This may be seen from Schönhardt’s polyhedron, de-
                                           picted on the left. It is obtained from a triangular prism by rotating the
                                           top triangle, so that each of the quadrilateral faces breaks into two triangles
                   C
                                           with a non-convex edge. Try to triangulate this polyhedron! You will notice
                                           that any tetrahedron that contains the bottom triangle must contain one of
A                                          the three top vertices: but the resulting tetrahedron will not be contained in
                             B             Schönhardt’s polyhedron. So there is no triangulation without an additional
Schönhardt’s polyhedron: The interior      vertex.
dihedral angles at the edges AB  , BC    To prove that a triangulation exists in the case of a planar non-convex
and CA are greater than 180◦ .            polygon, we proceed by induction on the number n of vertices. For n = 3
                                           the polygon is a triangle, and there is nothing to prove. Let n ≥ 4. To
                                           use induction, all we have to produce is one diagonal which will split the
                                           polygon P into two smaller parts, such that a triangulation of the polygon
                                           can be pasted together from triangulations of the parts.
                                           Call a vertex A convex if the interior angle at the vertex is less than 180◦ .
                                           Since the sum of the interior angles of P is (n − 2)180◦, there must be a
How to guard a museum                                                                            233

convex vertex A. In fact, there must be at least three of them: In essence
this is an application of the pigeonhole principle! Or you may consider the
convex hull of the polygon, and note that all its vertices are convex also for
the original polygon.
                                                                                 B           C
Now look at the two neighboring vertices B and C of A. If the segment
BC lies entirely in P , then this is our diagonal. If not, the triangle ABC              Z
contains other vertices. Slide BC towards A until it hits the last vertex Z
in ABC. Now AZ is within P , and we have a diagonal.                                 A
There are many variants to the art gallery theorem. For example, we may
only want to guard the walls (which is, after all, where the paintings hang),
or the guards are all stationed at vertices. A particularly nice (unsolved)
variant goes as follows:

    Suppose each guard may patrol one wall of the museum, so he
    walks along his wall and sees anything that can be seen from any
    point along this wall.
    How many “wall guards” do we then need to keep control?

Godfried Toussaint constructed the example of a museum displayed here
which shows that n4 guards may be necessary.
This polygon has 28 sides (and, in general, 4m sides), and the reader is in-
vited to check that m wall-guards are needed. It is conjectured that, except
for some small values of n, this number is also sufficient, but a proof, let
alone a Book Proof, is still missing.

References
[1] V. C HVÁTAL : A combinatorial theorem in plane geometry, J. Combinatorial
    Theory, Ser. B 18 (1975), 39-41.
[2] S. F ISK : A short proof of Chvátal’s watchman theorem, J. Combinatorial
    Theory, Ser. B 24 (1978), 374.
[3] J. O’ROURKE : Art Gallery Theorems and Algorithms, Oxford University
    Press 1987.
[4] E. S CHÖNHARDT: Über die Zerlegung von Dreieckspolyedern in Tetraeder,
    Math. Annalen 98 (1928), 309-312.
234                                     How to guard a museum




“Museum guards”
(A 3-dimensional art-gallery problem)
